[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
If you're like me,
you become incensed when
you see someone littering.
Yet, we often turn a blind
eye to where our old tires go
after a tire change, where
our water bottles end up
when we recycle, and so forth.
But Mike Reynolds does not.
He spent decades taking our
garbage and building homes
with it, both here
and in disaster zones
around the world.
This is truly an
inspiring story.
And not only inspiring,
Mike, it's a story, to me,
above everything
else, of beauty.
Even the simplest
forms you build, to me,
are more beautiful than most of
the architecture we see around
us in this world.
And not only that,
spiritual beauty as well,
and I'm hoping we can get into
that part of the discussion
before we even launch
into the trials
and tribulations
of being a creative
in a non-creative world,
for the most part.
So welcome, and maybe tell us
what your original inspiration
was, because you are a poet.
You're a visionary.
You dream a lot of these
edifices into reality.
Where did all of
this come from that
sent you down the road
as an architecture
to building bubbles for housing?
>>MIKE REYNOLDS:
Well, I think, right
after architectural school,
I came to Taos, New Mexico,
which was a beautiful place.
And I came from the Midwest.
So in Taos, New Mexico,
there was mountains and mesas
and snow and desert,
and it was just way
different than the Midwest.
And I think that
set me up mentally
or emotionally to
feel things, I guess.
And the things I felt became
guiding visions or whatever
to my future, and I think that's
what put me in the position
to be doing what I'm doing now.
>>REGINA: So the space
itself allowed your mind
to expand into all of these
concepts in a new way.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I think
what happens to people
is if you can empty
your mind, really
amazing existing stuff
in the universe comes in.
And I think that's
all there is to it.
It's out there.
All the information is there.
You just have to
get in a situation
where you're empty
enough to receive it,
and I think that's
what happened.
>>REGINA: Your wife, when you
see her in the documentary,
sometimes she seems like
she's a long suffering woman.
She said, oh my god,
he's gone quiet again.
That means we've got
something brewing.
And how did her life and her
ideals fit in with your ideals
throughout all these
many years of creativity?
>>REYNOLDS: Well, she,
basically, put up with it.
But she's very creative, too.
And I think she may not always
agree with the intensity
that I will go after
things, but she
agrees that the direction
is a valid direction.
And she's there in
spirit with a lot of it
and there physically
with a lot of it.
>>REGINA: And for
those people who
want to go further
into your work,
you also wrote a book called,
"A Coming of Wizards."
>>REYNOLDS: The book,
"A Coming of Wizards,"
is a book that came to
me in terms of a vision,
I guess you would say, after
I got free in New Mexico.
It was just overwhelming how
free it seemed out there.
And then it made it
so I could receive
what is out there anyway.
And so that's how I ended
up writing this book,
"A Coming of Wizards."
And I actually go back
and look at it today,
and the things that
were said in there
still guide me today about
the pragmatic application
of this kind of thinking.
There was an actual incident.
I talk about it
sometimes, but I don't
like to get too
woo-woo with any of it.
I want it to be very pragmatic,
so people can accept it.
But it was a dream,
vision type thing.
And I was into pyramids and
am into pyramids, in terms of,
there is something going
on with the pyramids.
Look all over the
planet, there are
pyramids all over the planet.
So there was a
reason for building
these things, specifically
aligned and magnetically
aligned, and they involved
crystal and a lot of things.
So I experimented with them.
I had a bed in the
King's Chamber level
of a perfectly
proportioned pyramid.
I slept in it.
I spent a lot of time there.
I had a dream there.
The dream was the impetus
of "A Coming of Wizards"
book that turned me
on to thinking, that
allowed me to get
away and look back
at where we are on this planet.
And it caused me to want to
take a very pragmatic approach
to trying to make that happen
in a way that wasn't just words
and magic and spiritual talk.
I took it to a very
pragmatic level,
and that's how the
earthship itself,
as a building concept, a
sustainable building concept,
came about.
>>REGINA: Well, years
ago, many, many years ago,
I saw a movie called
"Slaughterhouse-Five."
I don't know if you
remember that one.
>>REYNOLDS: Vaguely, yeah.
>>REGINA: Anyway, he ends up
in this alternate world of his,
living in a bubble in space.
And that became my
ideal for a home.
Living in, literally,
a Plexiglas bubble
in the middle of a redwood
forest with some light pouring
in would be my ideal structure.
But anything that I
have been in in my life,
right down to the home I
own in Sedona right now,
the notion of these
rounded spaces
creates a completely different
experience and potential.
Can you talk about that?
Because your structures
are all rounded and domed.
>>REYNOLDS: Well, I think
what we're looking at,
in terms of what we call
biotecture-- we don't even
call it architecture anymore,
because I don't really
agree that architecture is
addressing our current needs,
physically or emotionally
or spiritually
or in any other way.
But we're really trying to
give ourselves the opportunity
and make people have the
opportunity to feel the earth,
to be--
to recognize that they
are part of the earth.
If we recognize we're
part of the earth,
then we're not
going to destroy it.
In other words, it's
like, my hand is out here,
so maybe I'm not aware of it.
But really, if I'm
not aware of my hand,
I can have it be damaged
and not even know it.
The earth is an extension of us.
We're an extension
of the earth, really.
And if we can make the dwelling
spaces, the sustainable vessels
that people live in, keep them
aware of the entire physique
of the earth, then
we won't be trying
to beg people to not destroy it.
They'll naturally treat it
like they treat their own body.
>>REGINA: Truly, and when
it comes to architecture,
seems like, certainly,
in modern history,
relatively modern history,
the last 1,000 years or so--
granted, there have been some
beautiful Gothic constructions
and such, where
this arched energy
is taken into consideration.
But by and large, people have
constructed boxes to live in.
This isn't how nature works.
There are very few examples
of boxes in nature, right?
>>REYNOLDS: Right.
I think the box architecture
that we are experiencing now
is a direct result
of the box thinking.
We are kind of in a box as
far as our thinking goes
and as far as our feeling
goes, and we don't really
get out of it.
So naturally, the
things we build
are going to reflect that.
I've tried to change it,
evolve it, and everything.
But now, I'm into
another phase of it,
in terms of just
trying to transcend it,
because it's there in cities.
And it's all over the world.
You're not going to change
that, but you can transcend it.
And I think that's
important, because we're
on a planet that is not really
doing too well with this.
And the result is, we are
going to be left alone,
not the planet.
>>REGINA: Right.
One of the people I've admired
historically in modern times
is Rudolf Steiner,
on a lot of levels.
And one of them was his notion
of space and architecture
and the lack of use
of right angles,
if it could at all be avoided.
And I think one of
the things people
have found interesting
about his work,
like his original
Goetheanum, which
was two interlocking
domes, is that you
can't see the means of support.
Is it simply that it's
so much more difficult
to build a domed space?
Is that why we're in this
functional boxed reality?
>>REYNOLDS: Well, our
world, in my opinion,
is run on economics these days.
Economy, money is
almost like God,
and that controls everything.
You can't have water,
power, sewage, food,
shelter without going
through money to get to it.
And that ends up governing our
thinking and our architecture,
and so it is an
expression of that.
And I think, in nature, nature
has nothing to do with money.
Trees don't have
to buy anything.
They simply grow out of
and are part of nature.
And if we could do that,
I'm sure our architecture
would change.
Our architecture that
we call biotecture
now is organically
expressing this thinking.
And I think that
will be in the future
if we can somehow transcend
this place that we're in now.
>>REGINA: And you
call them earthships.
Your homes are earthships.
You've been doing this
for over 30 years, right?
>>REYNOLDS: Over
40 years, actually.
>>REGINA: Over 40 years.
And all of these structures
are domed in nature.
When I see it, it
just lifts my heart
to see these structures,
even the simplest, most
rudimentary ones, because you
can feel your way into that
and what it would be
like to be in that space.
I mentioned in the
open of the show
that you're really fond
of using things that
are difficult to dispose of.
You can look at the stench
of a burning pile of rubber,
or you can do what you do with
them in the case of old tires.
And we'll have some visuals here
to look at, taking old tires
and packing them with
mud and there you begin.
Let's talk about
the original homes
you built and also using
beer cans to build bricks.
These dwellings, actually,
for the most part, last, too,
right?
>>REYNOLDS: Yes, they
last very well there.
I started this as,
I have to admit,
a contrived effort to
recycle, because there were so
many tires and cans and
bottles and things around.
But now, after doing
it for 40 years,
I really don't know
of a better way
to build, in terms of
longevity of the materials,
because bottles and cans and
tires are made very well.
But here's the most
important thing.
These materials are indigenous
to the entire planet.
I've been all over the world.
Every country has got
cans, tires, and bottles.
They're right at arm's
reach for us to use.
And if you came here
from another planet,
you would look at them
as, they grow here.
They're natural
products of this planet.
So I don't look at them
as garbage anymore.
I don't even use the
word garbage in my mind,
because there's no
such thing as it.
We invented the
concept of garbage,
because we don't know what to
do with a lot of our byproducts.
But to me, tires, cans,
bottles are natural resources
of this planet that are
very useful in building
our sustainable
vessels of the future.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that.
Let's talk about how you do
get this lovely domed effect.
>>REYNOLDS: Well,
they're sculpted.
A lot of them are very sculpted.
We are getting into more--
not hard rectangles, but shapes
that help them be affordable.
They're not all
domed, but the thing
is, the thinking is organic.
We've come up with a definition
of what we're trying to do,
in terms of people.
And every person, every village,
every city, every country,
the people have to be able
to address six issues.
And one of them is
comfortable shelter
that doesn't use fossil fuels.
One of them is electricity.
One of them is water.
One of them is food.
One of them is what
to do with sewage.
And one of them is what
to do with this thing we
call garbage.
Every country, city has to
address these six things.
So in our process of making
every single building address
those six things, it ends
up being organic looking,
and it's not just
addressing economy.
It's addressing the six things
that humans need for sustenance
on this planet.
>>REGINA: And the buildings, the
way you've moved them forward
over the years, are essentially
complete ecosystems,
self-sustaining
ecosystems, to the point
where you can grow your herbs
and vegetables and foods,
and even have a fish
pond for your own tilapia
right there in your home.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I
think that's the thing.
It's the thinking
of this is to really
transcend infrastructure.
In other words,
right now, people
have to pay for power, water,
sewage, comfortable shelter.
They even have to pay for
what to do with their sewage.
They have to pay for
disposal of their garbage.
If we can make this part of
the everyday living of people,
we've cut down their
dependence on infrastructure,
if not eliminated
it, and, therefore,
put them on a different
level in terms of economy
because the economy,
most people--
I travel the world a lot.
And they're rioting in Egypt,
in the Ukraine over a better
economy, because they think the
economy gives them sustenance.
Well, we're opening up a
pathway for sustenance that
has nothing to do with economy.
The sun is there.
The rain is there.
The biology and the physics
of the planet are there.
You don't have to go
through an economy
to get at them for
your sustenance.
So we're trying to make these
earthships be vessels that
put people in touch with
those phenomena of this planet
and give them a life.
>>REGINA: Let's just take
a look at one little film
you did that has all of
this enclosed into one,
before we start going
into the back story,
where you've been in the world,
and the politics of it all.
OK?
>>REYNOLDS: Um-hum.
>>REGINA: OK.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> I'm fishing.
>> Elijah is going to fish in
the tilapia pond at the Phoenix
to illustrate that you can
catch a fish out of the pond
in your own home and
cook it and eat it.
And that's what we're
going to try to do.
So you have to let it float
up there a little bit,
like that, pull it
in this way a little.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Okay!
>> Get the net.
Look how quickly did you
catch that fish, Elijah?
>> I'm not sure, about a minute.
>> About 30 seconds.
>> 30 seconds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Let's go cut some
stuff out of the garden.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Let's go get some rosemary.
This is the watercress.
Those are ready.
Let's go back in.
Here we're roasting some
veggies, a little salt.
That's really good.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: So when
we look at that,
I don't think there's a person
watching that that doesn't just
feel this incredible
desire to be off the grid.
The pressure that people
are under-- like you say,
having the economy
simply work for survival.
You've moved beyond that in the
case of this kind of living.
And as you say, you've
bought your freedom.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I
think, I bought mine,
but I want it to be
available to everybody,
because I'm looking at how much
stress there is on the planet.
People being two paychecks
away from being homeless.
Stress does breed crime
and disease and ill health
and war and everything.
So I'm seeing that if
everybody had everything
they needed via what
we call biotecture,
taking the place
of architecture,
we're taking a major step
toward relieving stress
on this planet.
And then who knows what
will happen with this thing
called humanity.
>>REGINA: I couldn't
agree with you more.
The agendas that
we'll allow ourselves
to be talked into because of a
sense of lack, and a sense we
might lose the little
bit that we have,
or it might be taken away
by some foreign country
or other people.
It would not exist.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I think it's
important to realize that,
not only are we a
part of the earth,
but we are all a
part of each other.
And it's all one big organism.
And I think we can change the
existing life on this planet
by recognizing that.
>>REGINA: I agree with you.
So this generation,
this young generation,
that's coming up in this way,
the more exposure they can have
to this-- it seems
to me, it's not
going to take more than two
generations where we really
could start turning it around.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I
think, I'm seeing it.
I've been doing
this for decades,
and we're now starting to
do schools in South America
and other parts of the world.
And when grade school
kids go to schools
that grow bananas in the
hallway and catch rainwater,
walking through the
door of the school house
embodies a different
kind of education.
In other words, there's
the reading, writing,
and arithmetic, that's--
we need it.
But there is the education
about life on this planet that--
they do a few token courses.
But we're not worried
about that now,
because the building
that they're sitting in
is embodying this education.
And the kids, you can
see the results already.
We've had a school in Uruguay
in existence now for two years,
and the kids love
to go to school.
>>REGINA: I'll bet.
>>REYNOLDS: And it's changed
the whole nature of everything.
Parents are moving to
this area so their kids
can go to this school.
So it is the kids, because
they, in two decades,
will be running
the permit offices
and running the
politics and doing
things that will make
it easier for people
to go in this direction.
Whereas now, it's harder,
just because, it's not
anybody's plan to make it hard.
It's just that by
nature, our reality
has grown to almost
choke us from evolution.
And I think that's what we're,
somehow, trying to transcend.
>>REGINA: I agree.
Let's go into the story.
Now, we'll go back
in time a little bit,
when you first started this.
You started gathering
a community of people.
And as your wife
said, you tended
to attract all kinds of people,
strange people, sad people,
people who were geniuses
in their own right, people
who had skills, people
who were down and out.
And you all gathered
together, because they
could see the beauty
in your vision
and started creating this
village of sorts in Taos.
The original homes you built,
you're talking about roughly
keeping a constant
temperature of--
I think in your film,
it said around 70.
Is that correct?
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, we have to go
into the physics of this planet
and the thermal mass and the
solar gain to understand it.
And it's actually very simple to
make a building stay 70 degrees
without fuel.
It's as simple as--
the example I use is I
had a big, black dog.
And that dog would lay in
the sun in the winter time.
He'd lay in the shade
in the summer time.
It's as simple as that.
All of this is that simple.
It's just understanding
that that's available to us.
So yeah, housing, we're making
housing all over the world that
stays comfortable
without fuel, and that's
one giant step for mankind.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it is, and
people don't remember what that
feels like-- except
when they go camping--
to not have these electrical
grids inside the house,
to have wireless running
through the house.
But it's a completely different
kind of feeling, isn't it?
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, well,
it's like, I think,
that's true, too.
When expose people to an earthen
situation in their living
vessel, you're
affecting their mind.
You know how they have
subliminal messages.
Well, of course, this
is a subliminal message
that the earth is
giving us, which
is going affect our thinking,
and thinking manifests reality.
And so it's going to affect
our reality for us to be
living in and of the earth.
>>REGINA: Truly.
And it's so interesting,
with our audience and Gaia
audiences in
general, oftentimes,
we're looking to the stars.
We're looking to have these
breakthrough messages come
from divine beings,
from sourced elsewhere.
When we often don't
stop and think,
one of those divine beings
in this cosmic architecture
is the earth itself.
And massive amounts of
intuitive, incredibly deep
information are constantly
being fed from the earth
that we're cut off from.
People aren't receiving
the information.
Instead, we're looking
to stars and satellites,
hoping we're going to get a
download from an ET somewhere.
And I find it just
fascinating when,
it's all right here already.
Our mechanism for
being able to connect
with that-- our tuning fork
is our body and our being.
It's right here, but
we're cut off from it
due to all these
artificial signals
that we've put into our space.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I call
that introverted evolution.
When ancient people used to
look at the stars or the sunset
or the clouds, we
look at TV, which
is just an image of ourself.
And we end up thinking
in terms of what we see.
And so I think by placing us
in a living situation where
we are seeing and feeling
and being in the earth, even
in a home, that is going
to shape our thinking
and shape our attitudes
and shape our future.
>>REGINA: I've had some of
my most profound experiences
in caves, where I'll
stumble across a cave
or intentionally
go to a cave, where
you're surrounded by
this incredible earth
energy, the Schumann
waves, and so forth.
And you have a completely
different spectrum
of access to yourself and
knowledge in that environment,
And essentially, you're
creating little caves of sorts,
because these are
all natural earth
materials without interference.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, they are.
They're not dark like a cave.
They're very bright, but they
are creatures of the earth.
I'm certainly not going to say
that to a building inspector,
but these buildings
are creatures
of the earth, that embrace
us and give us sustenance,
because they encounter the
earth to give us the things
that this human body needs.
And I'm not going backwards.
Yes, we need electricity.
But I don't want to get it
from a nuclear power plant.
I want to get it
right from the sun.
I want water, not filled
with chlorine and fluoride.
I want it right from the rain.
This is available to everybody
in a very empowering way that
gives them the right to have it.
And I think if every man,
woman, and child on this planet
were to have the access to
what I just call sustenance,
these six points,
then we're going
to be seeing a vastly
different world in the future.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
and a lot of people
that have visions of
the future almost always
see these little domes,
domed types of architecture.
That's very common.
I've seen that as well.
So in these domes, these
homes, these original homes
you built even years
ago, you're saying
that the temperatures
can drop as low as 20,
30 degrees below zero.
And they still tend to keep
their integrity, in terms
of the interior temperature?
>>REYNOLDS: Yes, that was
the first aspect of it,
is trying to make the
building stay comfortable
and getting more and more into
the things that can cause that.
And we, just by
trial and error, have
arrived at a place where,
yeah, we have buildings
that just blow people's minds
in terms of temperature,
because they are going outside
and their nostrils inside
freeze in the climate that
we have here in Colorado
and New Mexico at
high elevation.
And these buildings,
they walk inside.
They're walking around
barefoot with bananas
growing in the
hallway, and they're
like, how could
this possibly be?
But what's amazing is,
it's eighth grade physics--
is what it is.
The whole secret, if
you want to call it
that, to living on this planet
is nothing more than eighth
grade physics and biology.
>>REGINA: And you're taking
this around the world
and leaving these
templates that you
say a sixth grader
can understand,
in terms of the construction
of these places.
We'll talk about that
in just a moment.
But meanwhile, you have
your original community.
Everybody's pitching in
the grand experiment.
And you say, a lot was learned
through what the community
would accept or complain about.
It's like, no,
it's a little hot.
It's a little cold.
It's a little this and that.
And a lot of the adjustments
you made in the architecture
were reflections of
the complaints or needs
of the people.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, I
let the people guide me
in terms of responding to
what they complain about.
However, I didn't
always do that.
And that's how I got
in a lot of trouble.
I don't think the complaints
are valid in some cases.
So in a way, I was
just trying to do
this in spite of whether
people liked it or not.
That doesn't work.
I don't care how beautiful
an idea or a concept
is, you've got to give
it to people slowly.
If you impose new thinking
on them too quickly,
they simply get
rigid and reject.
An example I make to
myself is like, I once
had a banana tree way back.
I just planted it, and it
was already four feet tall
when I planted it.
It was in the back
of a building that
had a southern light coming in.
And it was a straight tree.
Well, slowly over
the weeks, that tree
leaned toward the light.
Its rigid trunk bent and leaned.
And I couldn't take
that tree and bend it
when I first put it there, and
that's what humanity is like.
We can't bend them right now
into a better way of thinking.
We have to let them
slowly grow toward it.
And I think that's a
lesson that took me
a couple of decades to learn.
>>REGINA: We're going to
talk about that lesson.
We might as well launch in.
So you started learning
first within your community.
There were certain things you
could really push forward.
And other things, you
were getting a little bit
of pushback on, maybe?
>>REYNOLDS: Oh yeah, pushback
is the story of my life,
because first of all,
it took me a long time
to learn that lesson.
But now, it's like
the only reason
we have a lot of stress
on this planet right
now is because we
have designed it.
We have religions and politics
and doctrines and dogma,
I guess, is what it is,
that people grow up in,
and they don't even know
there is another way.
And those things have taken
them away from the earth.
When really, if we can
expose them to that again,
whatever way we can, and it
has to be in small doses,
then they can get the
message at their own pace
and their own speed.
One thing that I've
been looking at
is, I didn't think
there was enough time
for us to fool around getting
this message very slowly.
But we're going to be all right,
and we're going to evolve.
And I think we don't have to
do the doomsday rush situation.
We do have to keep moving in
the direction of sustainability
on this planet.
>>REGINA: Well, you
were too big a dose
for the building department and
other powers that be in Taos.
In your documentary, wow,
what you went up against,
repeatedly-- and I have to
say, you did a beautiful job--
it seemed from the
film's portrayal of you--
of zipping it and trying
to just play the game,
which just was painful to watch.
So here, you have
these people that
are not creative thinkers, who
are somehow threatened by what
you're doing out
there and started
sending other people
within their departments
out, ultimately, with
guns to shut you down
when you and your band
of merry followers
were out trying to build
these little domes.
Tell us about the politics
of what happened there.
>>REYNOLDS: Well, it
wasn't anybody's fault.
It's just that these
people that were against me
were acting in the
direction of what
they thought was the
health and safety
and welfare of the people.
And I call that penny
wise and dollar foolish.
It's like they are keeping
us alive for the moment,
so that we can die
slowly in the future.
And I think that's
nobody's fault.
But it is the nature of
what's going on here,
and so it keeps me from
really getting bent out
of shape about it.
In other words,
it's nobody's fault.
I can't blame that person.
Even though they're
trying to put me in jail,
I still can't blame that person.
They grew up thinking that way.
And so I went through
several phases of this.
It used to be I hid
from building inspectors
and avoided them and
things like that,
because I knew I
was doing things
that-- building buildings out
of what they call garbage.
>>REGINA: Well, you didn't have
permits, you just had ideas.
>>REYNOLDS: It got
scary that way.
So my next method
of trying to do this
was to join them, so I went to
the legislature in New Mexico.
I spent four years
lobbying and presenting
and finally got a law passed.
That was horrible.
I would never spend four years
of my life doing that again,
but it was my attempt
at joining them.
It did work.
Governor Bill Richardson
signed the bill,
and it is an Act
in New Mexico now.
But that took too long, and
that was not a viable answer.
So now, I'm looking at--
well, here's the way I
explain it to myself,
is like, if you have a
dog and it has worms,
you try to cram a worm
pill down the dog's throat.
And you get bit.
He spits it back up.
He doesn't like it.
But if you take that
worm pill and you put it
in a ball of hamburger, throw
it at the dog, he swallows it.
So that's the way
I look at it now.
I know what the
world wants and what
they're capable of
receiving, and I
take what we want to
do and put it in that.
And they don't even
notice it, and it's
causing us to be able to--
without stress, without war,
without conflict,
it's causing us
to be able to transcend
the situation that we're
in throughout the world.
>>REGINA: But
initially, what you
were trying to do with this bill
was just have a zone set aside
where you could be
free to experiment.
>>REYNOLDS: It
seemed very logical.
>>REGINA: It seemed logical.
You had the land.
Why would government
concern itself
to the point of anger and
filibustering and so forth?
>>REYNOLDS: Yes,
they're not seeing.
We test airplanes,
and it kills people.
We test automobiles.
People get killed.
We test drugs.
Really, it's ridiculous.
And the one thing that
almost got them thinking
was here in New Mexico--
in New Mexico, we
tested the atomic bomb,
and it blew apart 10,000 acres.
So it's still polluted today.
So why can't we take 10 acres
and test methods of living?
But it hits nerves or something.
>>REGINA: It does.
The amount of anger
that was engendered
in some of these people
is really quite shocking.
What do you feel they
felt under threat by?
Or they just don't like
people doing things outside
of the rules.
>>REYNOLDS: Well, that.
But the first time
I told an engineer
that I was going to build
a house out of beer cans--
he was my older mentor
that I was looking up to.
And I told him I had this
great idea to build a house out
of beer cans.
It was in a bar.
He stood up--
>>REGINA: That's where
those good ideas come up.
>>REYNOLDS: In a bar.
And he stormed out of
the bar read in the face
saying I was a disgrace to
the architectural community
for wanting to build
out of garbage.
In other words, human
waste and garbage
are things that
people don't want
to consider as a good thing.
Biologically, they are good, and
garbage is a natural resource.
And I want the things
that nobody else wants.
It's almost like alchemy.
I can turn them into things
that we need for our life.
Human waste turns into
food if it's done right.
Garbage turns into
building materials.
One of my things on this planet
that I would consider to be
a mentor-type thing is a tree.
A tree has what we
would call garbage.
It drops its leaves
on the ground,
and they turn into
dirt for more trees.
They're not in wrappers
like our garbage.
They make more soil
for more trees.
The tree breathes
out oxygen, and it
breathes in carbon dioxide.
The tree absorbs
energy from the sun.
The tree absorbs nutrients
and water from the earth
and from the rain.
It's sitting there, encountering
the phenomena of the planet,
and we call ourselves
intelligent?
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
So this happened, what--
was it three times?
Three attempts
before you finally--
>>REYNOLDS: Four.
We got it on the fourth attempt.
Each time, I got a
little more savvy
about how to handle
myself there.
And I was definitely
out of my element
and don't ever want
to do it again.
But it was impressive, to me,
to see that if you kept at it,
people will start hearing you.
And it had to do with
Governor Bill Richardson, too.
He's a thinker, and
he's a good governor.
He was a good governor.
And he saw that what we were
doing could make some sense.
He said, you're on to
something, and he ended up
signing the bill.
Whereas, there are a lot
of legislators that--
they have-- I
remember, there's one
in the movie that just says,
global warming is a myth.
Well, it's fine,
let him think that.
I don't think he
thinks that now.
Things are changing.
You can't convince people.
You have to show people.
And I don't really ever
challenge people in an agro way
or anything.
You simply have to put it
out there, here's water.
Do you want to
drink it, or do you
want to wait a while until
you're dying of thirst
and drink it?
That's a way we're trying
to put this out there now.
Not cram it down
people's throats,
just, here is what we've found.
I think one of the ways I look
at what we're doing now is--
I'm not a genius that
thought up all of this stuff.
I'm just using
biology and physics
that's already there, eighth
grade biology and physics.
The way I look at what we're
doing is I compare it to like,
you're in a subway and
the subway caved in,
and you've got 70 people there
in pitch black total darkness.
And I looked over and I saw a
teeny, teeny, little pinpoint
of light.
I went over there, and I
started pulling a few rocks away
from it.
And it got a little bigger.
And other people saw that
and came over and started
helping me pull rocks away.
That's what's going on.
>>REGINA: You have to
show people a better way.
So you were able to get
the permits and such to be
able to do the subdivision.
You won, but you were building
repetitive little houses.
And one of the
things that really
got me was hearing from the
other people in the community
saying, when this
mindset came in,
they felt like they
lost their ability
to really dream any longer.
And you said, we
lost our ability
to simply make mistakes
and learn from them.
Let's talk about that.
>>REYNOLDS: Well, I think, in
our world, our developed world
today, a mistake is a lawsuit.
A mistake is a take
your credentials.
A mistake is a bad
reputation and a bad review
on the internet.
Mistakes are considered bad.
Just like human waste
is considered bad,
garbage is considered bad,
mistakes are considered bad.
I look at all of those
things as positives.
We learned this thing that
we're doing from trial and error
mistakes, and I've made
millions of mistakes.
But each one, I
learned a little more.
If you do something
that's successful,
you haven't learned anything.
And so we just keep
making the mistakes
and learning more
about the earth,
about the phenomena
of the earth.
And that's an education
that's ongoing for us.
And so we on this planet,
in this day and age,
mistakes are taboo.
I think that should
be changed, too.
We should encourage mistakes and
not have the stigma around them
that we have today.
>>REGINA: I think
there's a university--
the name is eluding me.
I think there's a
university in California,
its theme is the
university of failure,
which is how you learn.
I love that idea.
Because in life,
everyone, every parent
will say, oh, we learn
through mistakes.
But once it gets to an
institutional level,
once it becomes something
under someone else's purview,
you're not allowed to
make mistakes anymore.
Was that a bit of a heavy
hearted moment for you,
to know that everything you
were going to do now was
going to be closely
scrutinized and regulated?
>>REYNOLDS: Well, yes it was.
I always squirm around and
figure out a way, I guess.
But I have found myself
in recent history--
we've won some battles, and
we are able to do some things.
The world is evolving
to the extent
that one out of every 10
regulators is aware of the fact
that we need to
make some changes.
And they will go there with an
earthship idea, and they'll go,
I love those things.
I want it to happen.
We'll help you get through.
Then there's a bunch of
them that say, no way.
But the thing is, on this
planet, it's getting to be more
and more people are aware of it.
But there are places on
this planet that I run to.
I went to Indonesia,
to a deserted island,
and we built there
with no rules.
>>REGINA: This is so cool.
I want to get to that.
Let's bring it up to the
year 2005 and the tsunami.
Were you the one that was
contacted by this one man
in the Andaman Islands?
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah.
Even then, it was
out around the world,
to some extent, what we were
doing and attempting to do.
So an architect from
the tsunami islands--
I mean, from the Andaman
Islands contacted me and said,
the time for-- it was
a very short message--
the time for dropping
meds and food is over.
It's time for something
real to happen,
to help us get out of
this and grow out of it.
And will you come and help us?
So I went to my bank-- and
I've got a good rapport
with the bank-- and I
said, I need $50,000
to go help these people.
And that was on a Tuesday.
On a Thursday, I had the money.
We got our shots, and we went.
But I learned from that.
We do that a lot now.
We're going to
Puerto Rico now, too.
But I found that a major
disaster is a hole in dogma.
They are so needy from--
they need water.
They need shelter.
They need everything.
They don't care about
any rules or regulations.
They just need water.
They need shelter.
And so when those things happen,
like that earthquake in Haiti
and so on, the people,
as well as the regulators
and the people that
run the government,
there's just a giant hole in
dogma, and we go through it.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
creativity can flourish
under those conditions.
So with this particular
experience, first of all 3/4
of the population was gone.
Peoples' families were
completely broken apart.
They really, truly had nothing.
At the end, seeing
this little dome
and seeing these gutters that
allowed for the rainwater
to be captured and seeing
the little, green hand-pump
inside so that they
could literally
source their own water
from inside their dwelling,
I just found so
inspiring and beautiful.
And you say, they
called it magic.
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah, they do.
Several times, it's been
called magic, what we do.
But really, magic is
simply understanding
the phenomena of this
planet and going with them.
And we keep getting
better at that.
And we do go to places
after disasters for one,
to help the people with what
we've learned, but also,
because we get to learn there,
and we have a place there
where we are not
regulated and controlled.
And so it's a mutual situation,
a mutual beneficiary situation.
And like I say, we
have made a practice
of going to those
places after disasters.
We're in Puerto Rico right now.
And then we also go to places
where there is no disaster,
but where there's no people.
And that's fantastic, too.
In other words, to go to
some deserted island and just
start doing what we know
how to do because we
can go to an island
where there's nothing
and end up, like in Indonesia,
with two little earthships that
have 6,000 gallons of
water, high speed internet,
electricity, the best
flushing toilet in Indonesia.
We know we can settle the
earth in a way that is not
hurting the earth, and you
don't need infrastructure
of any kind to do this.
And what we need
to do, though, is
we need to be able to do
it to practice and learn,
and you can't do that unless
you create a law, like we did,
to practice and learn.
But that law, it
still has limitations.
We got the law passed,
but they're still
squeezing the law, not out of
malice or anything like that,
but just out of ignorance.
>>REGINA: First of all,
that little house took,
what, two weeks
to build, roughly?
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: The whole
community was watching.
Pretty much everyone left there
was watching, more or less.
You had that main
architect with you
who was really spearheading it.
And you said, you left behind
a very simple set of plans,
right?
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so really, did
they continue replicating these
there?
What happened?
>>REYNOLDS: They continued
using the techniques
for various things.
That's another thing that
we've learned over the years,
and now, we're really
employing it in Puerto Rico.
We employed it on Easter Island.
We employed it in Sierra Leone.
And that is, we have to present
these techniques in such a way
that they can be replicated.
In other words, it's just
another learning experience.
It took us a while to figure
out that we have to make
these things easy to replicate.
And then that's like a
Petri dish or something.
A bacteria is not going to
grow, unless the temperature is
right, and the medium in
the Petri dish is right,
and there's enough
moisture, and so on.
We have to create
a situation where
these things can be replicated.
No matter how good they
are, if the people there
can't replicate them, we
haven't really succeeded.
And that's what we're trying
to do now in Puerto Rico.
And it is working
in Puerto Rico.
We were down there a few
weeks ago, started building.
I actually got my architect's
license in Puerto Rico, too.
And we started
building, and they
have continued, at a slow
pace, with the project.
And now, we're going
back to show them more,
and it is working
like a virus there.
And in many places
around the world,
it is working like a virus.
We're just getting to understand
the magic of the virus.
>>REGINA: Well, and
you say, a sixth grader
could understand these
plans, for the most part.
They're that simple.
>>REYNOLDS: They are.
>>REGINA: Even though it has
geothermal implications and all
that, it's still--
there's digging in the dirt
and there's circulation,
and it's still
relatively simple.
>>REYNOLDS: It is.
It is simple, and it's just
got to be presented simple.
In the last seven or so years,
we've started an academy,
and we have an
earthship academy,
where we have 300 or
400 students a year
come through the academy.
And we do the academy
in New Mexico,
and we do some sessions
around the world.
And the students are seeing--
they're resonating with
the potential of this.
And a very interesting
thing is, like say
we have a session that
has 40 students in it,
at the end of the
session, at least half
the students don't
want to leave.
>>REGINA: I'm sure.
>>REYNOLDS: You graduate
from Yale or Harvard,
you want to get to hell
out of there, quick.
And you graduate from this,
and they don't want to leave.
They don't want to go back to
the other life that they had.
So we know that we're
resonating with something
that's in people already.
And we know that we've
got a long way to go,
but it is that little pinpoint
of light in the darkness.
And the more rocks we pull
away from it, the more--
the bigger that light
will be as a way out.
And I think it's
important for me
to realize that I didn't
invent or create that light.
I found it, and I'm trying to
make the hole through to it
bigger for everybody.
>>REGINA: Very
true, and yet, you
have some earthly
obstacles, such as,
how do you get access to land?
How do you get
ownership of land?
How did you end up on
these deserted islands?
Did you have to buy the island?
How does that work?
>>REYNOLDS: All of these things,
the more you do, the more you
cause things to happen.
For instance, the
Indonesia island,
they contacted
me, because Bali--
which is a destination
resort area--
the reason people came there was
because of the beautiful coral
and the beauty and everything.
Well, now, with thousands and
thousands of people there,
sewage going into the
sea, diesel fluid going
into the sea for
power and energy,
they are ruining the
place that people--
they're ruining what
people came there to see.
And Indonesia has, I don't
know, thousands of islands,
and they don't want the
rest of their islands
to be going in that direction.
They've got on to what
they call sustainability.
And it's an overused
word, and a lot of people
don't know what it means.
But they want to develop
the rest of the islands
in a more sustainable way,
so they don't get destroyed.
They heard, through the
internet, that we do this,
or we attempt to do this.
It's a 30 acre island.
I was offered a third of the
island to do whatever I want
and then help them do the
same on the other 20 acres.
So that's how we ended up
with the island in Indonesia.
And that situation
started something.
I'm getting offered land
all over the world right now
on those terms.
Actually, I don't care
if I own the land.
The agreement says I get to
use the land for 35 years.
Well, that's enough for me.
>>REGINA: That should do it.
>>REYNOLDS: So that's
the other thing.
We don't care who owns
the building or the land
or anything.
We want the building
to be there.
We want people to use it.
I was just in Puerto Rico.
And there, we had funders,
big corporations considering
funding us to go there.
And when they found out
we didn't know or care
who owned the land or who was
going to own the building,
we were just doing it
involving a bunch of people
and making it
happen, they said, we
can't function under
these loose situations.
And so we're funded.
We're getting funded
by people themselves.
People all over the
world are coming
and paying to come and help
us, and that funds the project.
So we're learning a way to
not be inhibited in any way,
to move through this
planet with a virus.
And so we're still learning.
We're way into
learning at this point.
>>REGINA: Well, in the
Southwest, in particular,
it's not uncommon for people
to have a piece of land
and have a home but then
want to put a yurt or a kiva,
or something on the land.
So that also falls in alignment
with what you're saying.
Even if it's not your
primary dwelling,
to be able to create
these spaces--
maybe as an office, maybe
as a meditation space,
maybe as a guest
house for someone--
all these are within
possibility, right?
>>REYNOLDS: Yeah,
and we're learning
that you can't be a purist.
I wanted to go and
be a purist, and I
got all kinds of feedback,
blowback, and pushback.
But if I can take this
and make it not so pure,
make it just in the direction
of what I think is right,
then it can be accepted.
And you have to make things
palatable, not just to people
themselves, but you
have to make things
palatable to the powers that be.
You can't scare people with an
absolutely radical new idea.
You have to give it to
them very, very slowly.
>>REGINA: So where are some
other places in the world right
now you're being
offered these lands?
>>REYNOLDS: India, in
Columbia, Australia.
I just was in
Australia and found
by going to the places
and them knowing--
they know about what we're
doing from the internet.
I could move there and live
there the rest of my life
and build the rest of
my life without permits.
There are many places
all over the planet
that we could do this, but
I don't want to stay there.
I can't just escape
to those places.
I've got to come back and try to
hammer it out in New York City.
And we are actually
doing sketches
for a project in New York City
that may or may not make it.
But it is important
to know, for me
to know, that I'm not
stuck by trying to do it
where it doesn't
want to be done,
because I got options to
do it where it can be done.
>>REGINA: Good for you.
So right now, what is
lighting your jets the most?
Your academy is-- how
many people a year
are you training,
basically, right now?
>>REYNOLDS: We have
about seven sessions
of 40 people, something
around 300 people a year.
And then they're from
all over the world.
So it's just crescendoing.
It is growing so that if
we want to put together
a very big project, we could
call together a couple thousand
people, and they'd come.
And they'd do it, and they
want to make a career of it.
And so it's getting
pretty exciting
to see where it's heading.
>>REGINA: Well, I just
have to say, thank you
on behalf of everyone,
that you've taken your life
to create this kind of
sustainability and beauty
for everybody.
I just love what you're doing.
You're a true inspiration.
>>REYNOLDS: Thanks.
>>REGINA: Thank you, Mike.
You can go to
amazon.com, pick up
a copy of the film I've
been referring to called,
"Garbage Warrior."
You can also pick up
the first five chapters
of "A Coming of Wizards," in the
app store under Simple Survival
Earthship.
It's so refreshing to see
this kind of commitment.
It's running so deep.
And the intrinsic
beauty involved in this
is unsurpassed.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]